# Validation

## Learning objectives
- Get to know typical validation strategies in EO
- Understand where uncertainties appear in a workflow by design
- Understand why validation is important
- The validation of large scale mapping products
- Validate some pixels of the snow cover area map

## What is validation
- Definition of validation in EO
- The importance of validation

## Critically Analyse a workflow
- Identify sources of uncertainty in the applied workflow
- Process graph with pop-ups of sources of uncertainties
- Strategies of how to improve

Now that we have carried out a very basic approach to solve our research question we should take some time to identify possible sources of uncertainty and think about how to improve them:

- Optical earth observation has some inherent drawbacks, most importantly: clouds. Especially in mountain regions.
  - We are excluding images where a certain cloud coverage is exceeded. There would still be some information available.
  - We are not filling in the gaps that clouds generate. This leaves us with some uncertainty.
- Use data fusion techniques and include SAR data, that can penetrate the clouds.
  - Sentinel-2 has a 6 day repeat rate. This means we do not know what happens with the snow cover in between two acquisitions.
  - Use data fusion techniques and include other optical sensors and SAR data
- Use physical snow models or heuristics to estimate the snow cover in between
  - We are using a threshold for discriminating between snow and no snow. Changing this arbitrary value will influence our results.
  - There are better, more complex ways to identify snow.
- Snow Cover does not represent the amount of snow.
  - Therefore we would need to calculate the snow depth.
  - Or better the Snow Water Equivalent.


## Typical validation approaches
- Ways of doing proper accuracy assessment (methods)
- How to express the certainty of the map/pixels (measures)
- Taking into account the accuracy of the validation data
- How to properly state the limitations of a map (what is still not quantifiable after the validation)
- How to publish the validation results with the main product

## The validation of large scale mapping products
- The difficulty of validating global/continental data sets
- Producing Global/Continental data sets, the spatial distribution of sample/training/validation points and extrapolation into the unknown (e.g. trained model into amazonas/sahara, downscaling climate variables into the high mountains) -> S14Science in Amazonas (ground truth in remote locations)

#### Video: The validation of large scale mapping products

> Video content in cooperation with [Hannah Meyer](https://www.uni-muenster.de/RemoteSensing/team/meyer/index.html) (University of Münster).
> *"Validation isn't optional. It's a must."*

## Exercise
- Validate some pixels of the SCA map produced before
- Use station data from ClirSnow Project: https://clirsnow.netlify.app/dash-results/dash-climatology.html#explore-climatic-boundaries
  - There seem to be 4-6 stations in the catchment
- Express the accuracy correctly, publish it with the result (metadata or layer)

## Quiz

### Theory

What are common problems in creating and validating global maps?

    [[x]] The spatial distribution of reference data: There are usually areas in the world where reference data is clustered and areas where there is hardly any data available.
    [[ ]] None: We have cloud computing that can scale to produce global maps and machine learning models can automatically account for data sparse regions.
    [[x]] ...

What is the Area of Applicability? _Answer in the exercise: 33_validation.ipynb_

    [( )] Adige Catchment
    [(x)] Val Passiria Catchment
    [( )] Rienza Catchment


### Exercises

How many snow stations are in the catchment? _Answer in the exercise: 33_validation.ipynb section **'Load snow-station in-situ data'**_

    [( )] 3
    [( )] 7
    [(x)] 5

Which openEO process is used to extract the time series of the snow covered area at the station locations? _Answer in the exercise: 33_validation.ipynb_

    [( )] reduce_spatial
    [( )] resample_cube
    [(x)] aggregate_spatial

Which is the station with the lowest accuracy? _Answer in the exercise: 33_validation.ipynb section **'validate the SCA results with the snow station measurements'**_

    [( )] Rifiano Beobachter
    [( )] Saint Leonardo in Passiria Osservatore
    [(x)] Plata Osservatore

When is the date with the maximum runoff? _Answer in the exercise: 33_validation.ipynb section **'compare to discharge data'**_

    [( )] 2018-06-03
    [( )] 2018-04-17
    [(x)] 2018-05-03

How is the relation between snow cover and runoff? _Answer in the exercise: 33_validation.ipynb section **'compare to discharge data'**_

    [( )] When the snow cover is high, also the runoff is high.
    [(x)] Snow melt is followed by increased runoff.
    [( )] Snow melt is followed by reduced runoff.


## References
- https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-022-29838-9
