# Data Formats and Performance

## Learning Objectives
- Understand what cloud native data formats are
- Understand how the cloud does computing more effitiently

## Outline
- Cloud Native Data Formats
  - Why do we need them
  - What is there advantage over classical file formats
  - Not one format to rule them all.
  - Examples
- Performance in the cloud
  - Tiling
  - Scaling
  - Distributed Computing
- The Mircosoft Planetary Computer Setup - State of the Art open source cloud native technology stack
  - ODC, STAC, xarray, dask, cogs, ...

## Cloud native data formats

### What are cloud native data formats
Cloud native formats or cloud-optimized formats, are file formats specifically designed to optimize the storage, access, and processing of geospatial data in cloud computing environments. These formats are tailored to leverage the scalability, flexibility, and parallel processing capabilities of cloud infrastructure, enabling efficient handling of large-scale datasets.

#### Video: Cloud Native Data Formats
- What are cloud native data formats
  - From traditional file system to cloud-optimized
  - What is different?
- Show different cloud native formats
  - how they are stored
  - There is not one single cloud native data format that suits all the needs
- Examples of Cloud Native Data Formats in Action:
  - The Microsoft Planetary Computer

### Characteristics of cloud native data formats
Cloud-optimized means mainly optimized "read" access with partial reads and also parallel reads. Main characteristics common for cloud-optimized formats:

- **Data Chunking:** Cloud native formats employ a chunk-based organization, where the data is divided into smaller chunks or blocks. This enables parallel processing and efficient retrieval of specific portions of the data, reducing the need to access the entire dataset.

- **Internal Indexing:** These formats incorporate internal indexing structures that facilitate fast spatial and attribute queries. This enables efficient data access and retrieval operations without the need for extensive scanning or processing of the entire dataset.

- **Metadata Optimization:** Cloud native formats optimize metadata storage and indexing, allowing for efficient access and retrieval of metadata associated with the data at once. This supports faster discovery and interpretation of data properties and characteristics.

- **Compression and Tiling:** Cloud native formats often employ advanced compression techniques to reduce storage requirements while maintaining data quality. Additionally, they utilize tiling strategies to divide the data into smaller, manageable tiles that can be independently accessed and processed.

HTTP Range Request allows clients to request only a specific portion or range of data instead of a complete dataset.

### Examples of cloud native data formats

- **COG** - Cloud-Optimized GeoTIFF (COG) is an optimized version of the GeoTIFF format. It organizes raster data into chunks, utilizes internal tiling and compression, and uses HTTP range requests for efficient data access in the cloud.
- **ZARR** Zarr is a format specifically designed for storing and accessing multidimensional arrays. It supports chunking, compression, and parallel processing, making it suitable for large-scale geospatial datasets, for example, weather data. Metadata is stored externally in data files itself.
- **FlatGeoBuf** Cloud optimized vector data format. It is a binary encoding format for geodata and holds a collection of Simple Features.

#### Animated Content: Connect cloud native data format to its use and pre-decessor (drag and drop)
<iframe src="https://create.eo-college.org/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php?action=h5p_embed&id=10" width="959" height="589" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="allowfullscreen" title="Cubes&amp;Clouds: Cloud Native Data Formats"></iframe><script src="https://create.eo-college.org/wp-content/plugins/h5p/h5p-php-library/js/h5p-resizer.js" charset="UTF-8"></script>


### Available Material
- Ryan Avery, Aimee Barciauskas, Development Seed, United States (2023). Technologies used to Create, Store and Access Geospatial Data in the Cloud. https://2023.ieeeigarss.org/view_paper.php?PaperNum=5306
- ESIP Talk on Cloud Native Formats: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ac_UKunUrNM
- FOSS4G Talk On Cloud Native Formats (Matthew Hanson)
  - https://talks.osgeo.org/foss4g-2023/talk/XBHYF9/
  - https://space.cloud68.co/s/xExLwCmzzKEcoB9?dir=undefined&path=%2FLumbardhi%2F28.06.2023&openfile=1356611
- OGC White Paper on Cloud Native Formats (Chris Holmes, Scott Simmons):
  - https://www.ogc.org/blog-article/towards-a-cloud-native-ogc/
  - https://www.ogc.org/blog-article/towards-a-cloud-native-geospatial-standards-baseline/
  - https://www.ogc.org/blog-article/the-latest-on-cloud-native-geospatial-standards-in-ogc/
- Cloud-Native Geospatial Foundation initiative of Radiant Earth:
  - https://cloudnativegeo.org
- [Tweet](https://twitter.com/opencholmes/status/1677144519215833089) from Chris Holmes (great example - postholer)

## Scaling 

#### Animated Content: Tiling and application (drag and drop)

## Quiz
What are cloud native data formats in EO and GIS

    [(X)] Cloud native data formats in EO should be compatible to cloud services (APIs, http requests, cloud storage), enable fast viewing and access to spatial sub regions.
    [( )] Cloud native data formats in EO are exclusively designed to be compressed as much as possible, so that the least amount of storage space is necessary.
    [( )] Cloud native data formats in EO have to be human readable when you open them in a text editor.

Connect the cloud native data format and it's predecessor to it's spatial data type (https://www.ogc.org/blog-article/towards-a-cloud-native-geospatial-standards-baseline/, (https://cholmes.medium.com/an-overview-of-cloud-native-vector-c223845638e0)

- [[raster] [n-dimensional raster] [vector]]
- [( )     ( )                    (X)     ]  shapefile
- [( )     (X)                    ( )     ]  zarr
- [( )     ( )                    (X)     ]  geoparquet/arrow
- [( )     ( )                    (X)     ]  flatgeobuff
- [(X)     ( )                    ( )     ]  geotif
- [( )     (X)                    ( )     ]  netcdf
- [(X)     ( )                    ( )     ]  cloud optimized geotif (COG)


Lazy-loading is essential when working with large data collections, why?

## Compression Quiz

Consider a cloud provider, that should decide if compressing the data on its storage would let it spare money.

If the compression process of a COG takes 0.05 CPU hour every 1 GB of data, the total amount of COGs on the storage takes 1200 TB and one CPU hour costs 0.05€ for the first 10000 CPU hour and then 0.03€ for the rest, how much would the compression process cost?

    [( )] 3000€
    [( )] 1200€
    [(X)] 2000€
    [( )] 2043€

Solution:
- 1 TB = 1000 GB following the international standard, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gigabyte.
- The amount of data on the storage is 1200 TB * 1000 GB/TB = 1200000 GB
- If to compress 1 GB of data takes 0.05 CPU hour, to compress 1200000 GB it will take: 1200000 GB * 0.05 CPU hour / GB = 60000 CPU hour
- The first 10000 CPU hour cost 10000 CPU hour * 0.05 €/CPU hour = 500€
- The rest is 50000 CPU hour and it will cost 50000 CPU hour * 0.03 €/CPU hour = 1500 €
- The total is 500 € + 1500 € = 2000 €

In the same scenario, now we also consider the storage maintanance cost. If each TB of storage has a maintenance cost of 0.5 € every month, how much time would it take before the compression would let the cloud provider spare money? Consider a compression rate of 70%.

    [( )] ~ 9 months
    [( )] ~ 10 months
    [(X)] ~ 11 months
    [( )] ~ 12 months

Solution:
- Without compression, every month the storage would cost: 1200 TB * 0.5 €/TB = 600 €
- With a compression rate of 70%, the data would use 1200 TB * 0.7 = 840 TB of disk space
- With compression, every month the storage would cost: 840 TB * 0.5 €/TB = 420 €
- With compression, each month it's possible to spare 180 €.
- Since the compression process costs 2000 €, and each month costs 180 € less with it, it would take 2000 € / 180 €/month ~= 11 months to start to spare money.
