## Access EO Data from the Cloud

Using a cloud provider for accessing data, and in this specific scenario Earth Observation data, could improve your productivity a lot. To get the most out of it, we will provide you some important insights.

### Learning objectives
At the end of this lecture you should have learned what **lazy loading** is and why it's important when working with large data collections.

Moreover, you should have learned the usage and peculiarities of the main data operators commonly available on cloud providers like:
1. Filter
2. Reduce
3. Apply
4. Aggregate

Finally, you should be able to create a simple workflow represented by an openEO process graph.

# Quiz

- Lazy-loading is essential when working with large data collections, why?
- Local Processing: What is the difference between the openEO Python Client and the openEO Python Client-Side-Processing? Tick what is correct. (The generated process graph is the same, client-side processing interacts with the cloud, client-side processing does not interact with the cloud, ...)
- Loading: What are the dimension names of the loaded datacube? (t, x, y, bands)
- Filtering: How many time steps are left after filtering temporally 2022-06-10, 2022-06-20? (4)
- Reducing Time: What would be a use case for reducing the time dimension? Tick what is correct. (get a full time series graph, getting a cloudfree image for a certain time range, get information about a whole sesaon, filling gaps in a time series)
- Reducing Bands: What are the dimension names after calculating the NDVI? (x, y, t) How many pixels are in the datacube? (x*y*t)



...

    [( )] 
    [(X)] 
    [( )] 