# 3.4 Data Sharing

## Learning Objectives
- Carry out an EO workflow on a cloud platform independently
- Make our results `open` and `FAIR`
- Collaborate with a community of researchers to reach a common goal

## Introduction
We have reached the last chapter of the course. You know about data cubes, cloud platforms and open science now. Now it's time to prove it! We will apply everything we have learned so far and complete our own EO workflow on a cloud platform adhering to the open science principles.
We have carried out a full EO workflow to produce our snow cover information. To make our results impactful we need to make them openly available to other researchers and the general public. Therefore we are going to learn how to share our data set (and code) properly - following the FAIR principles. We have learned about the concepts of open science in lecture 1.3 open science. Now we are going to apply our theortical knowledge!

 #### Video: Your Open Science Journey
 - OpenGeoHub, Importance of open science and making data FAIR, some of OGH examples, Encouragement to make data FAIR! Motivate Students, make them feel part of the community**

We are going to
- **Produce our own results**
  - Reuse process graph of 3.3: change extent, time and aggregation method (mean for the winter to produce only one layer)
  - Choose a sutiable region and timescale 
    - space: 100*100 px (some set value for everybody), according to resources on platform
    - time: 1 year, winter months
    - output format: COG
    - How students choose the region: 
      - webviewer where results are hosted, setup stack catalogue
      - maybe add a grid so that students can choose empty tiles (only regions above 1000 m)
      - once a tile is produced it will be viewable
      - the aim is to reach a goal together (i.e. closing the alps for a specific year)
      - Add some snow stations for validation
  - Validate our result --> Report Accuracy
- **Open our research: Make the data FAIR**
  - Flowchart: https://ardc.edu.au/resource/making-your-data-fair-a-flowchart/
    - fill stac metadata: in jupyterhub 
    - choose a license: all the same cc-by-4.0
    - publish the data: the result is a COG, it should be downloaded and hosted somewhere (i.e. private github of each student together with stac entry and process graph)
    - make the code/process graph available that we have used
    - The viewer needs to know where to fetch all the data from, stac, link to COG, metadata to display.
    - Go through the Data and Software Availability and Citation Checklist: https://data.agu.org/resources/availability-citation-checklist-for-authors
- **Evaluate how FAIR our result is**

## Exercise
- Produce Data: Reuse Processgraph, only change some things
   - extents
   - time range
   - aggregation method: yearly mean of winter months
- Validate Data: Choose closest station? --> Report Accuracy
- Open Science
  - Fill STAC Catalogue
  - Upload Data -> COG
  - Upload Code -> Processgraph
  - Add a license
  - (DOI)
- FAIR Self Evaluation Tool 

## Quiz
- We should only check that the data is availalbe.
- We should check the STAC entry
- Submit the process graph 
- Sort FAIR to what we have done
  - F: Findable - Searchable STAC CATALOGUE
  - A: Accessible - Available on an open platform/host
  - I: Interoperable - using standard formats COG
  - R: Reproducible - Publishing of the process graph 
- Do the FAIR self asessment tool
  - https://ardc.edu.au/resource/fair-data-self-assessment-tool/
  - https://www.fairsfair.eu/f-uji-automated-fair-data-assessment-tool
  - **Could be embedded directly in EO College:** https://github.com/au-research/FAIR-Data-Assessment-Tool

#### Video: Congratulations
- Congratulations on the finished course
- Motivation to continue


---
## Notes
### Topics
- We have a result, what now?
- Making the result FAIR, step by step

### TO DO:
- Where to host the results?!?!?!

### Exercises
- Apply the steps of making a result FAIR to the result obtained
- Make sure it is also reproducible
- Publish the result in an open map via COGS?
- https://github.com/EO-College/cubes-and-clouds/blob/main/exercises/34_data_sharing.ipynb

### Available Material
- Lecture 1.3 Open Science: https://github.com/EO-College/cubes-and-clouds/blob/main/lectures/1.3_openscience/1.3_openscience.md

### Possible Speakers
- OpenGeoHub, Open Data
- Someone from GEO
- Anca
